Airflow migration guide (#17285)
PrefectHQ/prefect: docs/v3/tutorials/airflow.mdx

| [**Airflow UI**](observability) | [**Prefect UI**](observability)             | Prefect provides real-time monitoring, task logs, and automation features. |

## Preparing for Migration

Before jumping into code conversion, set the stage for a smooth migration. Preparation includes auditing your existing Airflow DAGs, setting up a Prefect environment for testing, and mapping Airflow concepts to their Prefect equivalents.

**Audit your Airflow DAGs and dependencies:** Catalog all DAGs, schedules, task counts, and dependencies (databases, APIs, cloud services). Identify **high-priority pipelines** (business-critical, failure-prone, frequently updated) and **simpler DAGs** for pilot migration. Start with a small, non-critical DAG to gain confidence before tackling complex workflows.

**Set up Prefect alongside Airflow:** Prepare a **parallel Prefect environment** for testing before fully migrating
- [Install Prefect](/v3/get-started/install) (`pip install prefect`) and launch a [**Prefect Server**](/v3/manage/self-host) or sign up for [**Prefect Cloud**](https://app.prefect.cloud/)

> - Configure an [**execution environment**](/v3/deploy/infrastructure-concepts/work-pools) (local, Docker, Kubernetes)

Reviewer: I'm a bit confused by this step.  It makes me think I need to go up and set up an execution environment and/or do a deep dive into work pools before I can use Prefect.  Since we cover work pools later in the tutorial that feels like a rabbit hole I would want to avoid - especially when I could get (at least) my initial flows running using managed execution without having to think about Kubernetes or Docker if I want to.

Author: That's a fair point. Trying to balance an overview of "this is what the steps are going to be" with "getting started"

I agree though that this section is supposed to be about "testing before fully migrating" so I think you're right

Author: Revamped this section to mention running locally and managed execution

For each Airflow DAG, you can outline its Prefect flow structure (tasks and control flow), where its schedule will live, and what execution infrastructure it needs. With preparation done, it's time to start converting code.

## Converting DAGs to Prefect Flows

In this phase, you will **rewrite your Airflow DAGs as Prefect flows and tasks**. The goal is to replicate each workflow's logic in Prefect, while simplifying wherever possible. Prefect's API is quite ergonomic - many Airflow users find they can express the same logic with *less code and more flexibility*. Let's break down the conversion process step-by-step, and walk through a concrete example.

### Choose a DAG to convert
Start with one of your simpler DAGs (perhaps one of those identified in the audit as an easy win). For illustration, suppose we have an Airflow DAG that runs a simple ETL: it **extracts data**, **transforms** it, and then **loads** the results. In Airflow, this might be defined as:

```python
# Airflow DAG example (simplified ETL)
from airflow import DAG
from airflow.operators.python import PythonOperator

> from datetime import datetime

Author: yeah I think I'm okay with this how it is unless @daniel-prefect has any other thoughts on code style here.

> from datetime import datetime

Reviewer 2: I'm fine with two blank lines between functions.

# Airflow task functions (to be used by PythonOperator)
def extract_fn():
    # ... (extract data, e.g., query an API or database)
    return data

def transform_fn(data):
    # ... (transform the data)
    return processed_data

def load_fn(processed_data):
    # ... (load data to target, e.g., save to DB or file)

with DAG("etl_pipeline", start_date=datetime(2023,1,1), schedule_interval="@daily", catchup=False) as dag:
    extract = PythonOperator(task_id='extract_data', python_callable=extract_fn)
    transform = PythonOperator(task_id='transform_data', python_callable=transform_fn)
    load = PythonOperator(task_id='load_data', python_callable=load_fn)
    
    # Set task dependencies
    extract >> transform >> load
```

> In this Airflow DAG, we define three tasks using `PythonOperator`, then specify that they run sequentially (`extract` then `transform` then `load`). The DAG is scheduled daily. If we wanted 

Author: Sure did. And that thought is just gone forever I guess - just dropping the last sentance and sentance fragment

### Create equivalent Prefect tasks
In Prefect, we'll take the core logic of `extract_fn`, `transform_fn`, `load_fn` and turn each into a `@task` function. The code inside can remain largely the same (minus any Airflow specific calls). For example:

```python
# Prefect tasks for ETL
from prefect import task, flow

@task
def extract_data():
    # ... (extract data as before)
    return data

@task
def transform_data(data):
    # ... (transform data as before)
    return processed_data

@task
def load_data(processed_data):
    # ... (load data as before)
```

Notice we simply applied `@task` to each function. No need for a special operator class or task IDs - the function name serves as an identifier, and Prefect will handle the orchestration.

### Define a Prefect flow
Now we write a `@flow` function that calls these tasks in the required order:

```python
@flow
def etl_pipeline():
    data = extract_data()         # calls extract_data task
    processed = transform_data(data)  # uses output of extract_data
    load_data(processed)          # calls load_data with result of transform_data
```

> This Prefect flow function replaces the Airflow DAG, automatically executing tasks in order based on data flow—no need for `>>` dependencies or XComs. **Tasks pass outputs directly as function arguments**, ensuring a clear, Pythonic workflow.  

Reviewer 3: When not using `.submit()` to a task runner that enables concurrency or parallelism, tasks execute in the order they're called.

- **Pure Python** - No Airflow imports or context, making the flow easy to test, debug, and run consistently across environments (IDE, CI, or production).

### Validate functional equivalence
Once a DAG has been rewritten as a Prefect flow, execute the flow and compare its results with the Airflow DAG to ensure expected outcomes. If discrepancies arise, modify the flow accordingly. Keep in mind the original DAG may have depended on XComs or global variables that you will need to account for.

For each task and special case, including [subDAGs](/docs/apache-airflow/stable/core-concepts/dags.html#concepts-subdags) and [TaskGroups](/docs/apache-airflow/stable/core-concepts/dags.html#taskgroups), implement them as subflows or Python functions in Prefect. When transitioning from Airflow's TaskFlow API, keep in mind that Prefect's `@task` decorator serves a similar purpose but does not rely on XComs.

After completing these steps, the Prefect flow should accurately replicate the functionality of the Airflow DAG while being more modular and testable. The migration is now complete, and the next step is to focus on deploying and optimizing the new workflows.

> ## Infrastructure Migration Considerations

Reviewer: I get that we are mapping things over from airflow but since we are mentioning serverless is there a reason we don't also mention/include an example of managed execution here?  For someone doing a POC and using Cloud that feels like the easiest way to get started.

Author: Okay I've written a whole new section here - @zhen0 and @daniel-prefect can you give it a look:

https://github.com/PrefectHQ/prefect/pull/17285/commits/811c3d3a7381e1f80874c527f5e4074d0f41192f#diff-75e4c991c2a6246353c849331d0c86caf6be1f4200b15f9ebb717dd6f57dfb16R198-R248

Reviewer: The diff got so beig I couldn't open it so added some comments here: https://github.com/PrefectHQ/prefect/commit/811c3d3a7381e1f80874c527f5e4074d0f41192f#r153093006

It's mainly to say let's make it clear that Managed Execution is a Prefect Cloud only feature

Author: Got both of those items taken care of thanks!

Reviewer 2: Left comments

```python
@flow(task_runner=DaskTaskRunner())
```

By default, Prefect's **Process work pool** runs flows as subprocesses. A basic **Airflow LocalExecutor** setup can be replaced with a **Prefect worker** on the same VM using a **process work pool**, eliminating the need for a separate scheduler.

#### Airflow CeleryExecutor
**Airflow CeleryExecutor** where distributed workers run across multiple machines, using a message broker like RabbitMQ/Redis.

Prefect eliminates the need for a **message broker** or **results backend**, as its API server manages work distribution. To replicate an Airflow **CeleryExecutor** setup, deploy **multiple Prefect workers** across machines, all polling from a shared **work pool**.

**Setting Up a Work Pool and Workers**
1. **Create a work pool** (e.g., `"prod-work-pool"`):
   ```bash
   prefect work-pool create prod-work-pool --type process
   ```
2. **Start a worker on each node**, assigning it to the work pool:
   ```bash
   prefect worker start -p prod-work-pool
   ```
3. **Workers poll the work pool** and execute assigned flow runs.

> Prefect **work pools** function similarly to **Celery queues**, allowing multiple workers to process tasks concurrently. Multiple **work queues** can be created within a pool for **priority-based task routing**, without the overhead of maintaining a Celery broker or backend.

Reviewer 3: Workers will consume from the queue in an unbounded way [by default](https://github.com/PrefectHQ/prefect/blob/main/src/prefect/cli/worker.py#L87) without any load balancing behavior. Creating many workers doesn't reliably replicate a celery executor, but adding `--limit n` to each start command gets closer.

Author: Going to delete that second sentence and just leave it at "Prefect **work pools** function similarly to **Celery queues**, allowing multiple workers to process tasks concurrently."

#### Airflow KubernetesExecutor

> In Airflow, the **KubernetesExecutor** launches **each task** in its own Kubernetes pod. Prefect, instead, uses a **Kubernetes Work Pool**, where each **flow run** is executed in a Kubernetes pod, rather than launching separate pods for each task. This approach reduces fragmentation and simplifies configuration while maintaining scalability and isolation.

Reviewer 3: This fact about every Airflow task being an independent execution is true across all executor types - the only thing that differs across executors is control over resource allocation and isolation. I would recommend generalizing this comparison and moving it higher up in the guide.

Author: Okay this lead to a re-write. A new section under "Airflow Executors" before we get to the specific executor types, and a new comparison feature table below the concept mapping. So that's fun

Basically: **anything done with a custom Airflow operator or hook can be replaced in Prefect with a task using the appropriate Python library.** Prefect removes Airflow's constraints, allowing direct use of the full Python ecosystem. For example, instead of using a **BashOperator** to call an API via a shell script, install the required package in your environment and call it directly from a task, eliminating unnecessary workarounds.

### Observability

#### State and logging
**Task and Flow State Management**
In Airflow, task states (`success`, `failed`, `skipped`, etc.) are stored in a metadata database and displayed in the Airflow UI's DAG run view. Prefect also tracks state for **each task and flow run**, but these states are managed by the **Prefect backend** (Prefect Server or Cloud API) and can be accessed via the **Prefect UI, API, or CLI**.

After migration, similar visibility is available in Prefect's UI, where you can track which flows and tasks succeeded or failed. Prefect also includes additional state management features such as: 

> - **Flow cancellation** (`Cancelling` state).

Reviewer: Kind of a nit but 'cancelling' is a temporary state - runs should get to a 'cancelled' state. I'd also say "flow run" cancellation.

> - **Resuming failed flows** (with manual steps).

Reviewer: Another nit - in the UI we call it "Retrying" a flow run.

Airflow logs task execution output to files (stored on executor machines or remote storage), viewable through the UI. Prefect **captures stdout, stderr, and Python logging** from tasks and sends them to the Prefect backend, making logs accessible in the **Prefect UI, API, and CLI**.

To ensure logs appear correctly in Prefect's UI, use:
```python
@flow(log_prints=True)
@task(log_prints=True)
```
These flags route `print()` statements to Prefect logs automatically.

For centralized logging (e.g., ElasticSearch, Stackdriver), Prefect supports **custom logging handlers** and **third-party integrations**. Logs can be forwarded similarly to how Airflow handled external logging.

**Debugging and Troubleshooting**
Prefect simplifies debugging because tasks are **standard Python functions**. Instead of analyzing scheduler or worker logs, you can:
- **Re-run individual tasks or flows locally** to reproduce issues.
- **Test flows interactively** in an IDE before deploying.

This direct execution model eliminates the need to troubleshoot failures through a scheduling system, making debugging faster and more intuitive than in Airflow.

#### Monitoring
**Notifications and Alerts**

> In Airflow, monitoring is typically managed through the UI, email alerts on task failures, and external monitoring of the scheduler. Prefect provides similar capabilities through **Notifications and Automations**, which can be configured to trigger alerts via **Slack, email, or webhooks** based on specific events.

Reviewer: Another nit - I think notifications are deprecated so maybe better to just talk about automations here.

To replicate Airflow's alerting (e.g., failures or SLA misses), configure [**Prefect Automations**](/v3/automate/events/automations-triggers) to:
- Notify on **flow or task failures**.
- Alert when a **flow run exceeds a specified runtime**.
- Trigger **custom actions** based on state changes.

**Service Level Agreements (SLAs)**
Prefect Cloud supports Service Level Agreements (SLAs) to monitor and enforce performance expectations for flow runs. SLAs automatically trigger alerts when predefined thresholds are violated.

SLAs can be defined via the Prefect UI, prefect.yaml, `.deploy()` method, or CLI. Violations generate `prefect.sla.violation` events, which can trigger Automations to send notifications or take corrective actions.

For full configuration details, refer to the [Measure reliability with Service Level Agreements](/v3/automate/events/slas) documentation.

> **Implementation Considerations**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Implementation considerations
```

> Prefect allows flexible logging and alerting adjustments to match existing monitoring workflows. Logging handlers can integrate with **third-party services** (e.g., ElasticSearch, Datadog), and **Prefect's API and UI provide real-time state visibility** for proactive monitoring.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Prefect allows flexible logging and alerting adjustments to match existing monitoring workflows.
Logging handlers can integrate with third-party services (for example, ElasticSearch, Datadog), and Prefect's API and UI provide real-time state visibility for proactive monitoring.
```

> ## Deployment & CI/CD Changes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Deployment and CI/CD changes
```

> Deploying workflows in Prefect differs from Airflow's approach of “drop DAG files in a folder.” In Prefect, a **Deployment** is the unit of deployment: it associates a flow (Python function) with infrastructure (how/where to run) and optional schedule or triggers. Migrating to Prefect means adopting a new way to package and release your workflows, as well as updating any CI/CD pipelines that automated your Airflow deployments.

Reviewer 2: Avoid circular definitions (i.e. "a Deployment is the unit of deployment").

```suggestion
Deploying workflows in Prefect differs from Airflow's approach of “drop DAG files in a folder.”
In Prefect, a _Deployment_ associates a flow (Python function) with infrastructure (how and where to run) and optional schedule or triggers.
Migrating to Prefect means adopting a new way to package and release your workflows, as well as updating any CI/CD pipelines that automated your Airflow deployments.
```

### Prefect Deployment

> **From Airflow DAG schedules to Prefect Deployment:** In Airflow, deployment usually meant placing your DAG code on the Airflow scheduler (e.g., by committing to a Git repo that the scheduler reads, or copying files to the DAGs directory). There wasn't a formal deployment artifact beyond the Python files. Prefect, by contrast, treats deployments as first-class objects. You will create a deployment for each flow (or for each distinct configuration of a flow you want to run). This can be done via code (calling `flow.deploy()`), via CLI (`prefect deployment`), or by writing a YAML (`prefect.yaml`) that describes the deployment. 

Reviewer: Not sure if that past tense is deliberate?

```suggestion
**From Airflow DAG schedules to Prefect Deployment:** In Airflow, deployment usually meant placing your DAG code on the Airflow scheduler (e.g., by committing to a Git repo that the scheduler reads, or copying files to the DAGs directory). There isn't a formal deployment artifact beyond the Python files. Prefect, by contrast, treats deployments as first-class objects. You will create a deployment for each flow (or for each distinct configuration of a flow you want to run). This can be done via code (calling `flow.deploy()`), via CLI (`prefect deployment`), or by writing a YAML (`prefect.yaml`) that describes the deployment. 
```

Reviewer: Others can correct me here but if you write yaml I think you still need to call `prefect deploy`? The yaml is more a way of defining a deployment than creating it?

Reviewer 3: Yeah, you can run `prefect deploy`, which will build a yaml file for you through a wizard, or you can pre-write a yaml file and then run `prefect deploy`.

> **From Airflow DAG schedules to Prefect Deployment:** In Airflow, deployment usually meant placing your DAG code on the Airflow scheduler (e.g., by committing to a Git repo that the scheduler reads, or copying files to the DAGs directory). There wasn't a formal deployment artifact beyond the Python files. Prefect, by contrast, treats deployments as first-class objects. You will create a deployment for each flow (or for each distinct configuration of a flow you want to run). This can be done via code (calling `flow.deploy()`), via CLI (`prefect deployment`), or by writing a YAML (`prefect.yaml`) that describes the deployment. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Airflow, deployment usually meant placing your DAG code on the Airflow scheduler (e.g., by committing to a Git repo that the scheduler reads, or copying files to the DAGs directory).
There isn't a formal deployment artifact beyond the Python files.
Prefect, by contrast, treats deployments as first-class objects.
You will create a deployment for each flow (or for each distinct configuration of a flow you want to run).
This can be done via code (calling `flow.deploy()`), via CLI (`prefect deployment`), or by writing a YAML (`prefect.yaml`) that describes the deployment. 
```

> Key things a **Prefect deployment** defines:

Reviewer: Maybe add dependencies here too?  With an example in the yaml like:

```
job_variables:
      pip_packages:
      - MLB-StatsAPI
      - prefect-aws
      - prefect_github

> Key things a **Prefect deployment** defines:

Reviewer 2: You've already defined this key term, so no need to emphasize it going forward.

```suggestion
Key things a Prefect deployment defines:
```

> - **Target flow** (which function, and which file or import path it comes from).
> - **Infrastructure configuration**: e.g., use the “Kubernetes work pool” or “process” type, possibly the docker image to use, resource settings, etc.
> - **Storage of code**: e.g., whether the code is stored in the image, pulled from Git, etc. (Prefect can package code into a Docker image or rely on an existing image).
> - **Schedule** (optional): e.g., Cron or interval schedule for automatic runs, or you can leave it manual.
> - **Parameters** (optional): default parameter values for the flow, if any.

Reviewer 2: Avoid `etc` whenever possible. https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#etc

Also, this list is probably better expressed as a table.

```suggestion
| Parameter | Usage |
|-----------|-------|
| _Target flow_ | Which function, and which file or import path it comes from. |
| _Infrastructure configuration_ | For example, use the “Kubernetes" or "process" work pool type, the docker image to use, resource settings. |
| _Storage of code_ | For example, whether the code is stored in the image, pulled from Git. Prefect can package code into a Docker image or rely on an existing image. |
| _Schedule_ (optional) | Cron or interval schedule for automatic runs, or you can leave it manual. |
| _Parameters_ (optional) | Default parameter values for the flow, if any. |
```

> To migrate each Airflow DAG, you will create a Prefect deployment for its flow. For example, if we converted `etl_pipeline` DAG to `etl_pipeline_flow` in Prefect, we might write a `prefect.yaml` like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To migrate each Airflow DAG, you will create a Prefect deployment for its flow.
For example, if we converted `etl_pipeline` DAG to `etl_pipeline_flow` in Prefect, you might write a `prefect.yaml` like:
```

```yaml
# prefect.yaml
deployments:
  - name: etl-pipeline-prod
    flow_name: etl_pipeline_flow
    entrypoint: etl_flow.py:etl_pipeline_flow # file and function where the flow is defined
    parameters: {}
    schedule: "@daily"
    work_pool:
      name: prod-k8s-pool

>       # other infra settings like image, etc., if needed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      # other infra settings as needed, like image
```

```

> This YAML can define multiple deployments, but in this case we have one named “etl-pipeline-prod” which runs daily via the `prod-k8s-pool` (a Kubernetes pool perhaps). In Airflow, these details were all intertwined in the DAG file (the schedule was in code, the infrastructure maybe in the executor config or the DAG via `executor_config`). In Prefect, there is a separation of these concerns.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This YAML can define multiple deployments, but in this case you have one named “etl-pipeline-prod” which runs daily in the `prod-k8s-pool` (a Kubernetes pool perhaps).
In Airflow, these details were all intertwined in the DAG file (the schedule was in code, the infrastructure maybe in the executor config or the DAG with `executor_config`).
In Prefect, there is a separation of these concerns.
```

### Automation via CI/CD

> Many organizations use CI/CD to deploy Airflow DAGs (for example, a Git push triggers a Jenkins job that lints DAGs and copies them to the Airflow server). With Prefect, you'll likely adjust your CI/CD to **register Prefect deployments** whenever you update the flow code. Prefect's CLI is your friend here. A common pattern is: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many organizations use CI/CD to deploy Airflow DAGs (for example, a Git push triggers a Jenkins job that lints DAGs and copies them to the Airflow server).
With Prefect, you'll likely adjust your CI/CD to register Prefect deployments whenever you update the flow code.
The Prefect CLI is your friend here.
A common pattern is: 
```

> 1. On merge to main, build a Docker image with your flow code, push it to a registry

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. On merge to main, build a Docker image with your flow code and push it to a registry.
```

2. Then run `prefect deployment build -n <name> -p <work_pool_name> --cron "<schedule>" -q default -o deployment.yaml` (or use `prefect.yaml`) and apply it. 

> This can all be scripted. In fact, Prefect provides guidance on using [GitHub Actions or similar tooling to do this](v3/deploy/infrastructure-concepts/deploy-ci-cd). By integrating Prefect's deployment steps into CI, you ensure that any change in your flow code gets reflected in Prefect's orchestrator, much like updating DAG code in Airflow.

Reviewer 2: Since the subject is in the previous paragraph, we should restate the subject instead of referring to it as "this".

```suggestion
Deployments can be scripted.
Prefect provides guidance on using [GitHub Actions or similar tooling to do this](v3/deploy/infrastructure-concepts/deploy-ci-cd).
By integrating Prefect's deployment steps into CI, you ensure that any change in your flow code gets reflected in Prefect's orchestrator, much like updating DAG code in Airflow.
```

> Altenatively, if your deployment is set to pull the workflow code from your git repository each time, you only need to push the latest workflow code, and automatically next time your deployment runs it will pull the latest workflow code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, if your deployment is set to pull the workflow code from your git repository each time, you only need to push the latest workflow code.
The next time your deployment runs, it will automatically pull the latest workflow code.
```

> This CI pipeline approach allows versioning and automating your flows deployment, treating them similarly to application code deployments. It's a shift from Airflow where deployment could be syncing a folder - Prefect's method is more **controlled** and **atomic** (you create a deployment manifest and apply it, which registers everything with Prefect).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This CI pipeline approach lets you version and automate your flow deployments, treating them similarly to application code deployments.
It's a shift from Airflow where deployment could be syncing a folder&mdash;Prefect's method is more _controlled_ and _atomic_ (you create a deployment manifest and apply it, which registers everything with Prefect).
```

> ### Prefect in Production

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Prefect in production
```

> Once deployed, Prefect schedules and orchestrates flows based on your **deployments**. Follow these best practices to ensure a reliable production setup:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once deployed, Prefect schedules and orchestrates flows based on your deployments.
Follow these best practices to ensure a reliable production setup:
```

> - **High Availability**: If self-hosting, use **PostgreSQL** and consider running **multiple API replicas behind a load balancer**. Prefect Cloud handles availability automatically.
> - **Keep Workers Active**: Ensure Prefect **workers are always running**, whether as **systemd services, Docker containers, or Kubernetes deployments**.
> - **Logging & Observability**: Use Prefect's **UI** for logs or configure **external storage (e.g., S3, Elasticsearch)** for long-term retention.
> - **Notifications & Alerts**: Set up **failure alerts** via **Slack, email, or Twilio** using **Prefect Automations** to ensure timely issue resolution.
> - **CI/CD & Testing**: Validate **deployment YAMLs** in CI (`prefect deployment build --skip-upload`), and unit test tasks as **regular Python functions**.
> - **Configuration Management**: Replace Airflow **Variables/Connections** with **Prefect Blocks**, storing secrets in **CLI, UI, or version-controlled JSON**.
> - **Security & Access Control**: Prefect Cloud includes **built-in authentication & role-based access**; self-hosted setups should secure API and workers accordingly.
> - **Decommissioning Airflow**: Once migration is complete, **disable DAGs, archive the code, and shut down Airflow components** to reduce operational overhead.

Reviewer 2: Use a table here.

```suggestion
| Best practice | Description |
|---------------|-------------|
| _High availability_ | If self-hosting, use PostgreSQL and consider running multiple API replicas behind a load balancer. Prefect Cloud handles availability automatically. |
| _Keep workers active_ | Ensure Prefect workers are always running, whether as systemd services, Docker containers, or Kubernetes deployments. |
| _Logging and observability_ | Use Prefect's UI for logs or configure external storage (for example, S3, Elasticsearch) for long-term retention. |
| _Notifications and alerts_ | Set up failure alerts via Slack, email, or Twilio using Prefect Automations to ensure timely issue resolution. |
| _CI/CD and testing_ | Validate deployment YAMLs in CI (`prefect deployment build --skip-upload`), and unit test tasks as regular Python functions. |
| _Configuration management_ | Replace Airflow Variables and Connections with Prefect Blocks, storing secrets in CLI, UI, or version-controlled JSON. |
| _Security and access control_ | Prefect Cloud includes built-in authentication and role-based access; self-hosted setups should secure API and workers accordingly. |
| _Decommission Airflow_ | Once migration is complete, disable DAGs, archive the code, and shut down Airflow components to reduce operational overhead. |
```

For more details on operating Prefect in production, see the [Operate](/v3/manage/index) guide.

> ## Testing & Validation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Testing and validation
```

> Thorough testing ensures your Prefect flows perform like their Airflow equivalents. Since this is a **full migration**, validation is essential before decommissioning Airflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thorough testing ensures your Prefect flows perform like their Airflow equivalents.
Since this is a full migration, validation is essential before decommissioning Airflow.
```

> **Testing Prefect Flows in Isolation**

Reviewer 2: Since the following phases are intended to be done in sequence, I suggest leading with "First...", "Next...", and "Finally..." to emphasize this.

```suggestion
First, test Prefect Flows in isolation:
```

- **Unit test task logic** - Write tests for tasks as regular Python functions.

> - **Run flows locally** - Execute `@flow` functions directly (`etl_pipeline_flow()`) to validate logic.

Reviewer: Do we need to make it even more clear how simple this is?  E.g by simply running the python function?

- **Use Prefect's local orchestration** - Start a Prefect server (`prefect server start`), register a deployment, and trigger flows via Prefect UI to mirror production behavior.
- **Compare outputs** - Run both Airflow and Prefect for the same input and validate results (e.g., database rows, file outputs). Debug discrepancies early.

> **Validation Phase: Temporary Parallel Running (Shadow Mode)**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, validate by temporarily running Airflow and Prefect in parallel (shadow mode).
```

> - **Keep the Airflow DAG inactive** but available for testing.
> - **Manually trigger** both Airflow and Prefect flows for the same execution date.
> - **Write test outputs separately** to prevent conflicts, ensuring parity before stopping Airflow runs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Keep the Airflow DAG inactive but available for testing.
- Manually trigger both Airflow and Prefect flows for the same execution date.
- Write test outputs separately to prevent conflicts, ensuring parity before stopping Airflow runs.
```

> For batch jobs, this phase should be **brief**, ensuring correctness without long-term dual maintenance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For batch jobs, this phase should be _brief_, ensuring correctness without long-term dual maintenance.
```

> **Decommissioning Airflow**
> Once a Prefect flow is stable, **disable the corresponding Airflow DAG** to prevent accidental execution. Clearly document Prefect as the new source of truth. Avoid keeping inactive DAGs indefinitely, as they can cause confusion—**archive or remove them once the migration is complete**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, decommission Airflow.
Once a Prefect flow is stable, disable the corresponding Airflow DAG to prevent accidental execution.
Clearly document Prefect as the new source of truth.
Avoid keeping inactive DAGs indefinitely, as they can cause confusion—archive or remove them once the migration is complete.
```

> ### Common issues and troubleshooting

Author: I like this idea but am struggling to find a link for each one. Instead going to add a list of the top troubleshooting articles _after_ the list of common issues

- **Missing dependencies:** If a Prefect flow fails with `ImportError`, ensure all required libraries are installed in the execution environment (Docker image, VM, etc.), not just locally.

> - **Credentials & access:** Verify that Prefect tasks have the same permissions as Airflow (e.g., service accounts, IAM roles). If using Kubernetes, ensure pods can access necessary databases and APIs.

Reviewer: nit - do tasks have permissions?  Perhaps better to say workers here?

Author: Good call. Fixed

> - **Missing dependencies:** If a Prefect flow fails with `ImportError`, ensure all required libraries are installed in the execution environment (Docker image, VM, etc.), not just locally.
> - **Credentials & access:** Verify that Prefect tasks have the same permissions as Airflow (e.g., service accounts, IAM roles). If using Kubernetes, ensure pods can access necessary databases and APIs.
> - **Scheduling differences:** Airflow schedules may trigger at the end of an interval, while Prefect runs in real-time. Align Cron schedules and time zones if needed.
> - **Concurrency & parallelism:** Configure **work pool and flow run concurrency limits** to prevent overlapping jobs. If too many tasks run in parallel, use Prefect's **tags and concurrency controls** to throttle execution.
> - **Error handling & retries:** Test retries by forcing failures. If Airflow used `trigger_rule="all_done"`, implement equivalent logic in Prefect with `try/except`.
> - **Performance monitoring:** Compare Prefect vs. Airflow run times. If slower, check if tasks are running sequentially instead of in parallel (enable mapping, async, or parallel task runners). If too much parallelism, adjust concurrency settings.

Reviewer 2: I suggest using a table.

```suggestion
| Common issue | How to troubleshoot |
|--------------|---------------------|
| _Missing dependencies_ | If a Prefect flow fails with `ImportError`, ensure all required libraries are installed in the execution environment (Docker image, VM, etc.), not just locally. |
| _Credentials and access_ | Verify that Prefect tasks have the same permissions as Airflow (for example, service accounts, IAM roles). If using Kubernetes, ensure pods can access necessary databases and APIs. |
| _Scheduling differences_ | Airflow schedules may trigger at the end of an interval, while Prefect runs in real-time. Align Cron schedules and time zones if needed. |
| _Concurrency and parallelism_ | Configure work pool and flow run concurrency limits to prevent overlapping jobs. If too many tasks run in parallel, use Prefect's tags and concurrency controls to throttle execution. |
| _Error handling and retries_ | Test retries by forcing failures. If Airflow used `trigger_rule="all_done"`, implement equivalent logic in Prefect with `try/except`. |
| _Performance monitoring_ | Compare Prefect vs. Airflow run times. If slower, check if tasks are running sequentially instead of in parallel (enable mapping, async, or parallel task runners). If too much parallelism, adjust concurrency settings. |
```

> Throughout testing, keep an eye on the Prefect UI's **Flow Run and Task Run views** - they will show you the execution steps, logs, and any exceptions. The UI can be very helpful for pinpointing where a flow failed or hung. It's analogous to Airflow's Graph view and log view but with the benefit of real-time state updates (no need to refresh for state changes).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Throughout testing, keep an eye on the Prefect UI's **Flow Run** and **Task Run** views&mdash;they will show you the execution steps, logs, and any exceptions.
The UI can be very helpful for pinpointing where a flow failed or hung.
It's analogous to Airflow's Graph view and log view but with the benefit of real-time state updates (no need to refresh for state changes).
```

**Debugging tips:**

> - If a flow run gets stuck, you can cancel it via UI/CLI.
> - Utilize the fact that you can re-run a Prefect flow easily. For example, if a specific task fails consistently, you can add some debug `print` statements, re-deploy (which is quick with Prefect CLI), and re-run to see output.
> - Leverage Prefect's task state inspection. In the UI, you can often see the exception message and stack trace for a failed task, which helps identify the problem in code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If a flow run gets stuck, you can cancel it with the UI or CLI.
- Utilize the fact that you can re-run a Prefect flow easily. For example, if a specific task fails consistently, you can add some debug `print` statements, re-deploy (which is quick with the Prefect CLI), and rerun to see output.
- Leverage Prefect's task state inspection. In the UI, you can often see the exception message and stack trace for a failed task, which helps identify the problem in code.
```

> - Leverage Prefect's task state inspection. In the UI, you can often see the exception message and stack trace for a failed task, which helps identify the problem in code.

Author: Like the error AI results?

> - Leverage Prefect's task state inspection. In the UI, you can often see the exception message and stack trace for a failed task, which helps identify the problem in code.

Reviewer 4: yeah

> - Leverage Prefect's task state inspection. In the UI, you can often see the exception message and stack trace for a failed task, which helps identify the problem in code.

Author: Done

> As you systematically validate each migrated workflow, you'll build confidence in the new system. When all tests pass and the outputs match the old system's, you can declare the migration a success for that workflow. After migrating a few, you'll also develop a playbook for the rest, and the process may speed up.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you systematically validate each migrated workflow, you'll build confidence in the new system.
When all tests pass and the outputs match from the old system, you can declare the migration a success for that workflow.
After migrating a few workflows, you'll also develop a playbook for the rest, and the process may speed up.
```

> ## Post-Migration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Post-migration
```

> ### Optimizing & Scaling Prefect Workflows

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Optimize and scale Prefect workflows
```

> With your workflows running in Prefect, it's time to optimize, scale, and take full advantage of its capabilities. This section covers best practices for streamlining flows, monitoring performance, and ensuring long-term reliability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With your workflows running in Prefect, it's time to optimize, scale, and take full advantage of its capabilities.
This section covers best practices for streamlining flows, monitoring performance, and ensuring long-term reliability.
```

> **Simplify and Enhance Your Workflows**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To simplify and enhance your workflows:
```

- **Remove unnecessary complexity**: If your Airflow DAGs used workarounds (e.g., database intermediaries for data passing), replace them with direct Prefect task returns.

> - **Use subflows for modularity**: Instead of chaining DAGs, use **subflows** to orchestrate dependencies within a single flow.

Reviewer 4: Or could just use tasks in a single flow with the monoflow pattern- that's what was shown above, so maybe just mention that.

> - **Optimize parallelism**: Use **dynamic task mapping** (`task.map(items)`) to process large datasets efficiently.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Optimize async convenience**: Use **dynamic task mapping** (`task.map(items)`) to process large datasets efficiently.
```

> - **Remove unnecessary complexity**: If your Airflow DAGs used workarounds (e.g., database intermediaries for data passing), replace them with direct Prefect task returns.
> - **Use subflows for modularity**: Instead of chaining DAGs, use **subflows** to orchestrate dependencies within a single flow.
> - **Optimize parallelism**: Use **dynamic task mapping** (`task.map(items)`) to process large datasets efficiently.
> - **Leverage caching**: Enable **result persistence** to skip redundant computations.
> - **Ensure idempotency**: Prevent duplicate processing by parameterizing flows and validating execution logic.

Reviewer 2: A table is probably a better fit here.

```suggestion
| Technique | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| _Remove unnecessary complexity_ | If your Airflow DAGs used workarounds (for example, database intermediaries for data passing), replace them with direct Prefect task returns. |
| _Use subflows for modularity_ | Instead of chaining DAGs, use subflows to orchestrate dependencies within a single flow. |
| _Optimize parallelism_ | Use _dynamic task mapping_ (`task.map(items)`) to process large datasets efficiently. |
| _Leverage caching_ | Enable _result persistence_ to skip redundant computations. |
| _Ensure idempotency_ | Prevent duplicate processing by parameterizing flows and validating execution logic. |
```

> **Monitor and Maintain Your Prefect System**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To monitor and maintain your Prefect system:
```

> - **Track performance**: Use Prefect UI and analytics to monitor run durations, failure rates, and bottlenecks.
> - **Set up alerts**: Automate failure notifications via Slack, email, or other integrations.
> - **Improve debugging**: Use UI logs, parameterized re-runs, and version control for better issue resolution.
> - **Version control deployments**: Treat flows like code, using PRs and staging environments before production deployment.
> - **Update documentation**: Ensure internal runbooks reflect Prefect's CLI/UI for managing schedules, failures, and retries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Technique | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| _Track performance_ | Use Prefect UI and analytics to monitor run durations, failure rates, and bottlenecks. |
| _Set up alerts_ | Automate failure notifications via Slack, email, or other integrations. |
| _Improve debugging_ | Use UI logs, parameterized re-runs, and version control for better issue resolution. |
| _Version control deployments_ | Treat flows like code, using PRs and staging environments before production deployment. |
- **Update documentation**: Ensure internal runbooks reflect Prefect's CLI/UI for managing schedules, failures, and retries.
```

> **Scaling and Cost Optimization**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To scale and optimize for cost:
```

> - **Scale efficiently**: Prefect naturally distributes workloads across **Work Pools and Workers**, eliminating Airflow's scheduler bottlenecks.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Scale efficiently**: Prefect makes it simple to  distribute workloads across **Work Pools and Workers**, eliminating Airflow's scheduler bottlenecks.
```

Reviewer 4: Work queues can help with prioritizing work, but not sure want to introduce here.

> - **Scale efficiently**: Prefect naturally distributes workloads across **Work Pools and Workers**, eliminating Airflow's scheduler bottlenecks.
> - **Optimize infrastructure**: Adjust worker capacity based on usage, scaling vertically (more resources per worker) or horizontally (adding more workers).
> - **Reduce costs**: Consider **serverless work pools** (AWS ECS, GCP Cloud Run) to avoid idle infrastructure costs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Technique | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| _Scale efficiently_ | Prefect naturally distributes workloads across work pools and workers, eliminating Airflow's scheduler bottlenecks. |
| _Optimize infrastructure_ | Adjust worker capacity based on usage, scaling vertically (more resources per worker) or horizontally (adding more workers). |
| _Reduce costs_ | Consider _serverless work pools_ (AWS ECS, GCP Cloud Run) to avoid idle infrastructure costs. |
```

> **Final Steps**
> - **Share best practices**: Conduct a team retrospective to refine workflows and establish templates for new flows.
> - **Embrace Prefect's flexibility**: Now that scheduling and execution are handled seamlessly, focus on **building better data workflows, not managing infrastructure**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To set yourself up for future success:

| Technique | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| _Share best practices_ | Conduct a team retrospective to refine workflows and establish templates for new flows. |
| _Embrace Prefect's flexibility_ | Now that scheduling and execution are handled seamlessly, focus on building better data workflows, not managing infrastructure. |
```

> ### Congratulations!

Reviewer 2: Don't use exclamation points except when they're part of a code example.

```suggestion
### Conclusion
```

> By completing this migration, you've moved to a more scalable, efficient orchestration system. Prefect allows your team to **focus on engineering**—iterating faster, improving reliability, and scaling seamlessly. **Happy flowing!**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
By completing this migration, you've moved to a more scalable, efficient orchestration system. Prefect allows your team to **focus on engineering**—iterating faster, improving reliability, and scaling seamlessly. **Happy migrating!**
```

> By completing this migration, you've moved to a more scalable, efficient orchestration system. Prefect allows your team to **focus on engineering**—iterating faster, improving reliability, and scaling seamlessly. **Happy flowing!**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By completing this migration, you've moved to a more scalable, efficient orchestration system.
Prefect allows your team to focus on engineering—iterating faster, improving reliability, and scaling seamlessly.
```
